# 070-获取文件的拓展名

[TOC]

## 1. Overview

In this quick tutorial, we'll show how to obtain the file extension programmatically in Java. **We'll focus on three major approaches to the problem.**

In our implementations, the characters after the final ‘*.'* will be returned.

Therefore, as a quick example, if our file name is *jarvis.txt* then it will return the *String* “*txt”* as the file's extension.

## 2. Getting the File Extension

For each approach, we'll learn how to implement it and follow up with what happens in two special cases:

- when a filename has no extensions, such as a *makefile* file
- and if a filename consists of the extension only, such as *.gitignore* or *.DS_Store.*

### 2.1. Simple *String* Handling Approach

With this approach, we'll use a simple *String* handling approach to finding the extension:

```java
public Optional<String> getExtensionByStringHandling(String filename) {
    return Optional.ofNullable(filename)
      .filter(f -> f.contains("."))
      .map(f -> f.substring(filename.lastIndexOf(".") + 1));
}
```

This method will check for the dot ‘.' occurrence in the given filename.

If it exists, then it will find the last position of the dot ‘.' and return the characters after that, the characters after the last dot ‘.' known as the file extension.

**Special Cases:**

1. **No extension** – this method will return an empty *String*
2. **Only extension** – this method will return the *String* after the dot, e.g. *“gitignore”*

### 2.2. *FilenameUtils.getExtension* from Apache Commons IO

In the second approach, we'll find the extension using a utility class provided by Apache Commons IO library:

```java
public String getExtensionByApacheCommonLib(String filename) {
    return FilenameUtils.getExtension(filename);
}
```

Here, instead of the file name, we can also specify the full path to a file *e.g.* “*C:/baeldung/com/demo.java*“.

The method *getExtension(String)* will check whether the given *filename* is empty or not.

**If \*filename\* is empty or null, \*getExtension(String filename)\* will return the instance it was given. Otherwise, it returns extension of the filename.**

To do this it uses the method *indexOfExtension(String)* which, in turn, uses *lastIndexof(char)* to find the last occurrence of the ‘.'. These methods are both provided by *FilenameUtils*.

This method also checks that there's no directory separator after the last dot by using another method *indexOfLastSeparator(String),* which will handle a file in either Unix or Windows format.

**Special Cases:**

1. **No extension** – this method will return an empty string.
2. **Only extension** – this method will return the *String* after the dot, e.g. *“gitignore”*

### **2.3. Using the Guava Library**

In this last approach, we'll use Guava library to find the extension.

To add a Guava library, we can add the following dependency to our *pom.xml:*

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.google.guava</groupId>
    <artifactId>guava</artifactId>
    <version>24.1.1-jre</version>
</dependency>
```

For latest dependency, we can check [Maven Central](https://search.maven.org/classic/#search|gav|1|g%3A"com.google.guava" AND a%3A"guava").

After adding the library we can simply use its *getFileExtension* method:

```java
public String getExtensionByGuava(String filename) {
    return Files.getFileExtension(filename);
}
```

The method *getFileExtension(String)* will first check whether the given *filename* is empty.

If the *filename* isn't empty, then it will create a *File* instance by converting the given *filename* into an abstract pathname and call *File's* *getName()* method over it, which will return the name of the file denoted by this abstract pathname, or the empty string if the given *filename* is empty.

Based upon this return value it fetches the index of the last occurrence of the ‘.' by using *String* class inbuilt method *lastIndexOf(char)*.

**Special Cases:**

1. No extension – this method will return an empty *String*
2. Only extension – this method will return the *String* after the dot, e.g. *“gitignore”*

## 3. Conclusion

**When picking between Apache \*Commons\* and \*Guava\*, while both libraries have some common features and they also have functionality that's absent from their alternative.**

This means that if certain functionality is required, pick the one that has it. Otherwise, if more custom scenarios are required, pick the one that does the most of what you need and feel free to wrap it with your own implementation to get the desired result.

Also, check out all the examples in this article [on Github](https://github.com/eugenp/tutorials/tree/master/core-java-modules/core-java-io).